Is the college making an appropriate effort to try to correct these?
Yes.
And we've done, we're doing much better now than we were then.
But we were attentive to it then.
I think what you had was a case where there were so many factors, many women coming into their careers later in life as I was, so that when you start trying to compare,
It's hard to compare.
Years of experience, years since degree, it's very difficult to say what are exactly equivalent people.
Now we certainly realized then and we realize now that
Anyone who's in an underrepresented group on campus is likely to be swamped with student demands for advising, help me, what should I do in this case?
How should I handle that case?
These very important demands on them are likely to be much heavier than they are for members of a minority group, of a majority.
group, and those things must be taken into account in annual evaluations, in promotion and tenure cases, and they are hard as the Dickens to weigh properly.
As you judged it then, how did the status of a minority female
in terms of salary and whatever else, compared with that of a majority female?
There were so few, and there still are so few, that that's hard to answer.
I can think right off of only two examples, though surely there were others.
In one case, the minority female was probably paid somewhat less.
Her record on the surface of it would have looked fairly weak.
But I knew what pressures she always faced in this community, in the university, the pressures of isolation.
How can you compare that?
In the other case I'm thinking of, the person was relatively high paid compared with colleagues.
Statisticians refer to the small n problem, and it's very hard to generalize when you have a small n, a small number.
When you began that task as associate dean, did the dean or anyone else give you any guidelines, any directions, any counsel?
When I reported for duty up here, I think they had forgotten I was coming to work that day.
They didn't have a desk for me to sit at.
There were no instructions what to do and not even any suggestions what to do, and that was pretty much the way all the way through.
When the dean did his first kind of a semi-annual review with me, he said it seemed as though I'd had a little trouble getting going in my duties, and I don't think I quite had the nerve to say it, but what I thought was, is there any wonder?
Nobody even gave me a clue what I was supposed to do.
I started by making appointments with all the department heads and going to visit them on their turf, which I think is always important, and saying, what do you think is important for me to do in this job, and how would you suggest I get started at it?
All right.
Now, I'm not going to ask the negative on this one.
As you made those first visits, which departments and or department heads made the most positive impressions on you?
The one who made the most positive impression was the one who immediately seemed to understand that I wanted a cook's tour of the department, who took me around, showed me the facilities, gave me some statistics, said these are our three big challenges today, immediately perceived and was able to give me a kind of executive summary.
The one who made the worst impression.
What was that best one?
Oh, the best one was Doug Starr in journalism.
He immediately knew what I needed.
The one who made the worst impression, I will not name.
either by department or by name, but was a person who was much admired and knew it very well.
And when I asked my question, he said, I have no idea what you need to do.
That's for you to figure out.
I thought, thanks a lot.
Were there some female department heads in liberal arts?
There was one at that time.
Her name was Mary Zye.
In sociology.
She was, I believe at that time, the only female department head in the university.
And as you and your husband became a part of this community, describe what social activities you all got involved in early.
Ah.
Either by choice or by responsibility.
Yes.
We quickly became part of the dinner party kind of social life of this community.
You have a couple or two over.
Someone else has a couple or two over.
We attended the symphony concerts very quickly and regularly and any other musical events.
We attended Aggie Players.
regularly and often.
I have not kept that up.
It's not because I didn't like it.
It's, you know, what happens to your time.
What about athletics?
Oh, not much.
You didn't?
Were there any social events that you kind of felt, as an associate dean, you were obligated to attend?
Oh, yes.
Lectures in the college, certainly.
I mean, that's...
One might drive great pleasure from it, but I didn't even think about that as a social event.
That was work.
And who became your closest colleague friend or friends?
Paul Parrish and Charlie Johnson were my fellow associate deans at that time.
Paul Parrish is from English and Charlie Johnson.
He's from English.
He's now dean of liberal arts and we had offices.
His department of what?
He was political science.
Okay.
Our offices were very close to each other.
We talked a lot and also
Chuck Staup, our Saba in Liberal Arts.
Spelling.
S-A-B-O, Staup is S-T-O-U-P as in Paul.
He was a senior academic business administrator.
But he had been on the faculty himself for a few years.
So he had a dual perspective on things.
And I quickly came to feel that Chuck was a person to talk with when I was puzzling over what to do.
Not necessarily the business matters, but general wisdom.
You have to have
a sounding board or two.
Now you served as associate dean for how long?
For a total of seven years if you count the one year that I had my misadventure going to Auburn.
All right.
Now during that time were children here or were they elsewhere?
Our kids were all elsewhere.
My youngest son, Steven, had just started college that year at Rice, and so he would come home for the summers or for holiday occasions, but we had no offspring living with us.
We are very quiet people, probably less involved in the community than you would be, for example.
You're very outgoing.
What did you all do for relaxation?
We would rush home after work in the evening, eat a simple dinner, work a crossword puzzle, and work on our books or articles until about 1030, and that's what we still do.
Okay.
No big vacation trips?
We would get away every summer on a vacation trip, usually take a little pop-up camper behind our car and go visit my husband's parents in Nebraska and go camp out in Rocky Mountain National Park.
What were the joys, what were the satisfaction experiences of being an associate dean?
I felt that I could make a difference.
Not always.
I mean, there were times of frustration because an associate dean is a what we would call a staff position, not a line position, and you know the difference between those.
There were times where I thought we should be doing something different to be just to somebody, to be fair to somebody, and I couldn't make that call.
My boss could.
I can remember a few cases that I went home in the evening and cried over them and I should have remembered that before I became dean of faculties too.
But I could sometimes make a difference.
I helped found what is now the Women Faculty Network.
Describe that.
It seemed to me that there were women scattered around this university who were very isolated.
I had very early started looking at the statistics on where the women were.
And I could see just with the numbers that there was a lot of isolation.
And I was talking with Mary Zai, who was our department head in sociology.
And she and I agreed that we should try to get women together so they could get acquainted.
So we got a list of the women faculty, and we hand addressed invitations to a luncheon in the MSC.
We had two women come and talk about their research for the program.
That was very deliberately done because everyone always talked about, oh, women are wonderful teachers, which may or may not be true.
It's frequently true.
But very seldom would people talk about women are wonderful researchers.
And that may be just as true.
So we had that.
And then we organized another luncheon.
And by then we retired, and somebody else organized the next one, and it got going.
Did the numbers and percentages of women faculty here, was it much different from the same percentages at similar institutions elsewhere?
Other, say other land grant, other separate land grant?
Somewhat lower, but not drastically lower.
We are...
And this is still true.
The representation of women is lower than at institutions across the country.
Land grant, I don't know that I've ever separated out well enough to make a really good comparison.
But I think also the women in this university are clumped because of discipline and also certainly then and to some extent still tend to be more junior than it places across the country.
And it's easy to understand that.
Our faculty is very senior.
I mean, out of 1,710 tenured and tenure track faculty last fall, right at 900 were full professors.
So you don't change the percentage of a group of 900 very quickly.
When I came here, three and a fraction percent of our full professors were female.
Three and a fraction percent.
Now it's 6.5% or 6.75%.
That's after 12 years.
That sounds slow, but when you think that the N, the denominator in the fraction, is almost 900, and a lot of those people have been here a long time, then you can understand it.
You see, I think that comparisons would be most appropriate
for separate land-grant schools, Auburn, NC State, Virginia Tech.
Yeah, yeah.
K-State, Oklahoma State, and so forth.
Right, and those data are available, and I haven't spent the time poring over them.
We, there's less difference, of course, there, although still some difference.
If you talk like Kansas State,
If you talk like Davis, which is a very comparable land grant, talk NC State, I believe we are still somewhat lower.
If you compare us to Auburn, I doubt that we are lower at all.
As you became a part of this community, what?
What impressed you most about the institution, plus or minus in general?
The faculty, the students, the attitude, and so forth?
Oh, the attitude of open possibility.
That was what had struck me when I came here for an interview.
And that's what stayed with me.
That this place was unlimited in where it could go.
And certainly a confidence that it was already a very good institution, which I've always believed and wouldn't be here if I didn't believe it.
But the sense that we could be even better.
I think we are almost unique in our ability to change, and the change has been drastic, but to change while still keeping hold of great elements of sameness.
As you interacted with the students, how would you compare those with the students you had known at Rice?
That's a very interesting question and one that was very important to me from early on.
We have many students who are every bit as good as any of the students at Rice or at Bryn Mawr where I had been at one time previously.
But we also have a broader swath
of students.
And I think that is a good and constructive thing on the whole, and I'm glad that we do.
I believe in democracy, small d democracy.
And that doesn't mean that you throw the doors open and anyone who shows up comes in.
But I think people learn more and learn better when they are dealing with a broader swath of the human population.
We have that here.
Did you find in general that the senior administrators above you, particularly in those first years, seemed to be willing to consider new ideas, seemed to be open?
And the answer is certainly yes.
I think sometimes the central administration was a little bit taken aback by the dean of liberal arts being maybe a little too different.
and wanting to push the envelope a little too much.
As far as you were aware, in those liberal arts years, which deans had the most clout on the campus?
Oh, well, the dean of engineering and the dean of agriculture.
Certainly that was true.
I mean, it was just very obvious.
Then after them, were there any others?
It was never clear to me, really, how the, shall we say, the pecking order went.
I was not sure if it was the dean of science.
I was inclined to think it was the dean of science next, but maybe it was dean of business.
I just wasn't sure there.
like I've thought as an observer down through the years, sometimes, other than those first two, sometimes it depends on the personality of the individual dean or the college they represent.
Yeah, yeah.
But not necessarily one and the same.
But with agriculture and engineering, there's not any doubt, right.
All right, so you served as an associate dean of liberal arts how long?
I was an associate dean of liberal arts for seven years including my one year at Auburn.
All right, and you went to Auburn briefly to do what?
We thought we wanted to make another change.
I didn't think this was the place I wanted to stay and my husband didn't either.
And so we both went on the job market and we agreed we'd see what we could work out whoever got the first
And we tried to apply where there were two possibilities, you know, where we could see it working, because it's hard.
It so happened that Auburn was advertising for head of the Department of Civil Engineering.
and also for dean of the College of Liberal Arts, not associate dean, but dean.
And we both applied, and we were both asked for interviews.
I mean, I think it was like two weeks apart we got these phone calls asking us for interviews.
For dean of liberal arts, I was one of only two finalists.
There had been a third, but he had gotten tired of waiting around for the search to get finished, and he took a job somewhere else.
There was an internal candidate, and there was I. And when I went for the interview, I think I had a very good interview.
And the internal candidate sat and talked with me and sort of made noises that he might just pull out.
He asked me if I would consider him to be my associate dean.
And his friends later told me that he really had said he was going to pull out, and they talked him into staying.
He was chosen dean.
And he deserved it.
He'd been a good department head.
He'd been speaker of the faculty senate.
It was the right thing for them to do.
In the meantime, my husband had been offered the headship of the Department of Civil Engineering.
The dean there was someone we'd known at Rice.
They knew and respected each other.
Lauren didn't really want to be an administrator, but he thought he could work with Bill Walker pretty well.
And he wanted to accept the job.
But I was not chosen as dean.
The new dean phoned me and said, would I come as associate dean?
And that was a bitter pill to swallow because I didn't want to be associate dean anymore.
But Lauren had come here for me and it seemed right that I should go there for him.
So I said I would.
Then the dean called back and said, guess what?
My affirmative action officer won't let me hire you as associate dean because we haven't met a search yet.
So would you come as acting associate dean or interim, whichever it was?
That was really a bitter pill to swallow because I knew Auburn was not as good an institution as we are.
And not only was I going at the same rank, but I was dropping because there was that acting or interim.
But we went and we bought a house.
We went in good faith, meaning to stay.
Both of our deans at Texas A&M knew that this was a volatile situation.
And both of them gave us leave of absence here.
And both of the deans at Auburn knew that we had the leave of absence here.
So, so all four deans knew and that's the only honorable way to do it.
We went and they did their search and they offered me the associate dean position.
But Auburn has a very peculiar culture.
They are not used to their administrators necessarily having faculty positions.
In fact, their chief academic officer right before the one who was there at the time had come without a faculty position and had been turned down by two different departments and never had a faculty position.
But the new dean over there said, well, I have the job to offer you.
And I said, what about my faculty position?
And I will not do it if I am a faculty member.
That is my identity.
I don't go anywhere.
I don't have a faculty position.
And he said, well, put yourself up to the English department.
Now, that was the point at which I goofed up, because I should have said, no, you put me up to the English department.
But he just tossed me in.
And I found out later that people, well, at least one specific person who did American literature there, walked the halls and lobbied
her colleagues saying, if you vote for her, you are voting against me.
She'll be more senior than I am.
She will get the graduate students.
I won't get any.
And the vote was close, but the vote was negative.
And we gave in our letters of recommendation the next day.
Great irony of that was that my husband, who had not wanted to be an administrator,
had liked his job better than he ever expected, had done wonderfully.
And that meant he stepped out of that job.
We came back.
And I've been so thankful.
Right.
You came back as associate dean.
I came back as associate dean.
I had not expected to.
I had leave of absence from my faculty position.
I had thought, whoop-dee-doo, I'll come back as a real professor.
And Woodrow Jones was just going into his interim year before his permanent position.
And he said, would I please come back as associate dean for him?
And I said, I'll do one year.
And this is 80 or 90?
93, 94 was the year we came back.
Okay.
Did your task, when you came back, had it changed?
No, I stepped back into doing the same thing I was, the faculty affairs graduate programs.
Woody relied on us very heavily in that year because he was new in the role and he wasn't sure he had the role, you know, I mean an interim.
And so, and you were in that role for how long before you became dean of faculties?
I only stayed that one more year.
That's all I had promised to do, and that's all I did.
I went back to be, being a true professor in English.
First time in my life, really.
And I was happy as a clam.
And then this announcement was made of being a faculty and I couldn't resist.
And did, were you nominated, did you apply, or both?
I, people asked me was I going to be a candidate, and I said no, and then others would ask, and I'd say no, and finally I said I'll think about it, and then I applied.
And the vacancy came because Bill Perry was promoted?
To executive associate provost, that's right.
Describe the search process for the dean of faculty then, as far as you recall.
About how many?
Do you have any idea how many people they consider?
I do not know how many total candidates there were.
There were three finalists.
All local?
All local.
The dean of faculties is always a local person.
There's never been someone hired from outside as dean of faculties, and I think that tradition will be maintained.
But we were put through our usual paces.
The toughest single group that I had to talk to were the Distinguished Professors, Executive Committee of the Distinguished Professors, and the second toughest group was the Executive Committee in the Faculty Senate.
What was tough about each of those?
Distinguished Professors very much had their own agenda and
They were kind of aggressive about wanting to talk about it.
They were not laid back in any sense.
What were their key concerns?
The status of soft money researchers on the campus.
and their wish that they could have free discretion in the paying of those, whereas we require that they be in job classifications and subject to comparable policies as people who are paid from
state funds.
And you can say there's unfairness the way it is, but there certainly would be unfairness if it were another way.
And they were not pleased that I said so.
What about the Faculty Senate?
Well, the Faculty Senate, of course, had many issues in mind, as a Faculty Senate always should have.
And I guess I kind of irritated them.
I'm sorry.
I, let's stop a minute.
Okay, I remember the moment very well.
So I told them in our session that I had some fears that the Faculty Senate
had fallen away from one of its most important missions, which is the mission of raising significant issues.
You could say being a gadfly, and I don't think it's necessarily being a gadfly, but raising significant issues.
I was concerned that the Faculty Senate had become so institutionalized
that it had become bogged in routine processing and was not stepping back and taking the independent look and asking questions the way the early Senate had.
And I don't think they had expected someone in that interview to
to challenge the role of the Senate in that way.
And they were kind of, shall we say, shook up.
But those were the two hard interview sessions, I think.
And about how many finalists were there?
There were three finalists.
Three finalists.
Three of us were interviewed.
I think that's right.
As far as you know.
May have been four.
As far as you know, who made the decision as to who would be selected?
Well, the search committee made a recommendation, but the provost definitely made the decision.
And it was the current provost?
Ron Douglas.
I well remember my conversation with him during the interview process because I, he was entirely a cipher to me.
I did not know him.
I didn't know much about him.
I had seen him only in university faculty meetings.
And a large meeting like that is never the context in which this provost shines best.
He shines best in small group and individual sessions.
And so I didn't have much of an opinion formed of him until
this hour-long conversation, and he impressed me as a person who thought long and carefully about the big issues of higher education in a national perspective.
Obviously, yes, this institution, but in the context of the big issues of higher education nationally.
I immediately admired that.
During this interview process, did you get the impression that anybody had any preconceived notions of what the next dean of faculties must do or must not do?
No.
I had been a candidate when Bill Perry was selected for dean of faculties.
I probably should have mentioned that sooner.
And I think in that search, there were preconceived positions.
At that time, there was a very active discourse of, should the dean of faculty be an ombudsperson or not?
Should the dean of faculties have the tie with the provost or not?
And the way I remember that earlier search was that I would have a very clear sense when